The Genesis Melody
Note: there is an audio version of this guide on https://thegenesismelody.web.app
It works well to listen as your eyes follow along. Look for the audio in the upper right.


A Quick Forewor[a]d
Hey. Hi. Before we get started, I wanted to let you know that I love you. Yes, that’s extremely awkward to say in our generation, but it really shouldn’t be. Of course, I don’t know you, and we’ve never met. So my love for you is a bit limited, but you are an image of God like me, so… I love you. Oops, I said it again. My goal here is not to convince you of anything at all, but to invite you to receive a gift from God in His Word, so that we can know|love Him more.




Introduction and Motivation
Summary
Background
Why Study the Melody
Structure
Pattern Breakers!
Melody Observations
Genesis 1-7: The Melody Template
Genesis 1-7: Pattern Breakers!
Genesis 8-11: The Second Round of the Melody
Genesis 8-11: Pattern Breakers!
Genesis 11:27-22:19: Cycles Three to Seven with Avraham
The Melody Points to Jesus
The Seventh Collapse: Avraham’s Test
Seeing the Melody in the New Testament
Beyond Genesis 22: After the Sheva Cycle
Extra Sheva Observations
Your Next Steps
Closing Thoughts
A Short Farewell Prayer
Bibliography
Introduction and Motivation
This guide is organized into three main sections:
1. Introduction and Motivation - The part you are about to read.
2. Melody Observations - A detailed look at Genesis 1-22, broken into three parts:
   1. Genesis 1-7: The Template of the Melody
   2. Genesis 8-11: The Second Round of the Melody
   3. Genesis 11:27-22:19: Cycles Three to Seven with Avraham
From there, the guide naturally pivots on the details of the seventh cycle's collapse and re-creation moments. In the final section, we'll dive into that narrative and see how Avraham's Test connects to Jesus.
3. The Melody Points to Jesus - When you read the Bible, it’s tempting to read only the Gospels and New Testament letters. However, God’s grand song is best experienced when the Old Testament paves the way. This guide is the same. You should expect to enjoy the final section about Jesus the most, but do try to read the earlier sections first. Think of it like a movie: the climax means more when you haven't skipped the first hour.
Summary
When you approach the Bible, what do you see there? Well, what do you expect to see there? Our expectations are often at odds with our ability to simply receive the message. This guide will focus on reading Genesis 1-23 trying to see patterns. The goal is to approach the text as a blank slate. To be honest, I’m not capable of doing that either, but it’s important to know the mindset we are seeking for. Shaping the Bible to meet our expectations is rather pointless. The goal is to open ourselves up, so that we can be shaped by the Bible. What would we find there if we tried to read it like little children?


The Hebrew Bible, the Old Testament, was carefully written by humans partnering with the work of the Spirit over the course of hundreds of years to make God known to us.1 As a result, it is a VERY dense, beautiful collection of ancient scrolls with many layers to unpack. Readers who start at the beginning, myself included, see only a small fraction of the depth the authors are communicating. The goal of this guide is to focus on one significant layer that is often overlooked. 


There is a clear, repeated creation melody that runs throughout the Hebrew Bible and into the New Testament. Once you have eyes to see and ears to hear how the authors replay the notes, you won’t be able to miss them as you continue to read the Bible. This song starts with God bringing about creation, life, and blessing. Then, characteristic human choices and division cause things to come to a head in a collapse. God, however, uses collapse to once again bring about creation, life, and blessing from non-life. Understanding how God brings about and sustains life is foundational not just in the Bible, but in our own lives as well. So the authors provide a decoder ring, beginning on page one, to unlock the rest of the story. Since this repeated pattern is about creation, a genesis, and since it is easily seen in the scroll of Genesis, we call it The Genesis Melody. However, don’t be fooled! The author of life keeps creating well beyond the pages of Genesis.
Background
The melody is discussed at length in the BibleProject Genesis Classroom series, namely, these five courses:
  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	Heaven and Earth
	Adam to Noah
	Noah to Abraham
	Abraham
	Jacob
	The most succinct summaries of what Tim Mackie calls “The Melody” are found in session 11 of the Abraham class, titled The Genesis 1-11 Melody Repeats, or sessions 2 and 3 of the Jacob class, The Thematic Melody of Genesis 1-9 and Abraham Replays the Melody. However, if you are new to the melody concept, it’s best to start from the beginning. Through his studies, Tim began to see how the authors replayed similar concepts, often in the same order, that felt like the melody of a song. It emerged after years of teaching, exploring commentaries, and discussing the text with reading communities. This guide builds on those insights, to lay out the melody for you and help us all meditate on the purpose. What were these authors communicating by intentionally structuring the text in this way?
Why Study the Melody
What is the value in seeing the structure of the melody? The main focus in the Genesis courses is how the repeated notes should be ringing in our ears to link parts of the melody. Parallel stories might be separated by many chapters, but with only a few distinct notes the authors can put them side-by-side in your mind.2 One story informs the other, and both benefit from the connection. Let’s take a short but deep dive to consider one specific example: Genesis 3:6-7a. You probably know this text well. Notice the key words as you read it again.


3:6 and the woman saw that the tree was good for eating,
      and that it was desirable to the eyes,
      and that the tree was desirable to make one wise,
            and she took from its fruit and she ate;
            and she gave also to her husband with her, and he ate.
  7   and the eyes of both of them were opened,


The best way to hear what the authors are communicating in this passage is not to focus on these words alone. In isolation, these words have some value, but to fully grasp the verse, you have to spend time thinking about how it connects to the greater narrative. As we will soon discuss, this verse is a Choice in the first round of the melody. Let's compare it to the Choice in Melody four, Genesis 16:2-4, by reading the story of Sarai, Avram, and Hagar. Note, Avram is just an alternative spelling of Abram, who will later be renamed Abraham. In the BibleProject translation, you will see a few surprising spellings to help us more faithfully pronounce the original Hebrew names. Additionally, Yahweh, God's personal name, is used when appropriate instead of translating it to God or LORD. If that makes you feel uncomfortable, just replace “Yahweh” with “God” as you read (that's fine). 


Notice the repeated words here that echo the Eden passage above.
16:2 And Sarai said to Avram,
     “Look, please! Yahweh has restrained me from giving birth.
           Please, go into my slave-girl.
     Perhaps I can be built up by means of her.”
And Avram listened to the voice of Sarai.
3 And Sarai, the wife of Avram took Hagar, her Egyptian slave-girl,
   at the end of ten years of Avram dwelling in the land of Canaan,
and she gave her to Avram her husband as a wife.
4 And he went into Hagar and she became pregnant,
and she saw that she was pregnant,
and her mistress became cursed in her eyes.


The reuse pattern goes from taking a piece of fruit to taking an image of God. That escalated quickly! These two Choices are separated by 13 chapters, but they are clear hyperlinks. If you set them alongside one another, you can see how they are similar and how they are different. Additionally, they are both inversions of an earlier Choice pattern from Genesis 2:18-22, where God himself sees what is not good, then takes, builds, and gives. Let’s read that story and consider how all three passages inform one another.


2:18 and Yahweh God said,
"It is not good for the human to be alone 
I will make a help-counterpart for him


…
21 and Yahweh caused to fall a deep sleep on the human and he slept
   and he took one from his sides
   and he closed the flesh of its place
22 and Yahweh built the side which he took from the human into woman,
   and he brought her to the human


The authors signal connections through both word repetition and shared symbols.2 They are clues to help us become better readers, and it’s remarkable the depth of understanding your group can reach as you hold repeated stories in your mind. God saw good, tov, טוב, in Genesis 1 seven times, ending in a “very good.” Humans, however, characteristically see what is good for themselves in their own eyes: we take and eat (an image to consume in this case), then give (send out non-life choices), as shown in 3:6 and 16:3. But God sees what is not good: He takes and builds (multiplies abundance), then gives (sends out life). Both the similarities and the differences pop out as significant when you compare rounds of the melody. Finally, in both human replays, the male character is said to have “listened to the voice of his wife,” instead of trusting God. Who will you trust to receive the knowledge of good and bad?
Structure
For the purposes of this guide, we will consider a four-part melody that is repeated seven times from Genesis 1 to 22: Creation (C1), Choice (C2), the Division of Relationships (D), and Collapse (C3). The repeated pattern can be broken down in many ways and variations are welcome as we all understand the Hebrew authors slightly differently. Additionally, as the melody repeats beyond Genesis 22, the authors get more creative with twists and inversions that make this four-part model too strict; however, for our purposes here, it works pretty well. The cycle goes around like a circle.
  



Once you firmly grasp the melody, the stories from Genesis 1 through 23 will lock into place.
Pattern Breakers!
Now, you might be thinking that this all seems pretty gloom and doom.  Is life really an inevitable downward spiral that ends in a collapse? That’s depressing. No! Of course not. This is the characteristic human pattern, NOT the way to life. I think these authors love to make patterns just to break them. Let’s look at Genesis 5 for a moment which uses a very clear pattern. The text below is super long, but I bet you can see the point I'm making about pattern breaking in two seconds.


15 And Mahalalel lived sixty-five years,
and he caused the birth of Jared.
16 And Mahalalel lived eight hundred and thirty years after he became the father of Jared,
and he caused the birth of sons and daughters.
17 And all the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred and ninety-five years,
and he died.


18 And Yared lived one hundred and sixty-two years,
and he caused the birth of Enoch.
19 And Yared lived eight hundred years after he became the father of Enoch,
and he caused the birth of sons and daughters.
20 And all the days of Yared were nine hundred and sixty-two years,
and he died.


21 And Enoch lived sixty-five years,
and he caused the birth of Methuselah,
22 and Enoch walked with God three hundred years after he became the father of Methuselah,
and he caused the birth of sons and daughters,
23 and all the days of Enoch were three hundred and sixty-five years,
24 and Enoch walked with God; and he was not, for God took him.


The point is NOT the pattern. The point is the pattern breakers! As we listen for the notes in the melody, be especially on the lookout for pattern breaker moments. God can work through characteristic human choices, but see what God can do with the pattern breakers. People who choose to listen to God's voice get an opportunity to become partners in creation, not just in Genesis 1-23, but throughout the Bible. But I’m getting ahead of myself.  First, we need to see the pattern.
Melody Observations
This middle section is the most academic, but also the heart of this guide.  If you are a person who spends time in biblical scholarship, to you I say “Enjoy!” However, if you are a normal person without a rich background in Bible study, then to you I say “You can do it!”. Try to be like the people Paul met in Berea in Acts 16:11 “They received the message with great eagerness and examined the Scriptures every day to see if what Paul said was true.”
Genesis 1-7: The Melody Template
Instead of abstractly describing the characteristics of the notes, let’s look at the template of The Genesis Melody provided in Genesis 1-7. These early chapters of Genesis are intentionally placed at the start of this massive collection as an introduction to the entire work. They will plant seeds for themes that will take volumes to unpack. If we allow them to properly shape our imagination and world view, we will become better Bible readers.


Work was necessary for the biblical authors to share God's message with us, and work is required to receive it today. How would Jesus have expressed this point? In John 4:37-38 Jesus quotes an unusual phrase: “Thus the saying ‘One sows and another reaps’ is true... Others have done the hard work, and you have reaped the benefits of their labor.” Parables can have more than one meaning, a common Hebrew Bible technique, but, for our theme study, the seed sown represents the Wisdom of God planted in His Word. These authors have worked with the Spirit to plant the key insights, but communication requires work from both the speaker and the listener. We have to put in time together with the Spirit to convert words into a relationship, so that we can live in a right relationship with Him. The authors use analogies that we can understand, like seed or light, but it all centers around taking on God's view of reality as truth. The only way to reap this freely given fruit is by meditating on it over time, then living it out in our lives. Let's get started by looking for the four-part melody in Genesis 1-7 using the table below.


As you read the text, note that the name Elohim is yet another name for God, a bit less personal than Yahweh. Again, feel free to translate “Elohim” as “God” if it makes you feel more comfortable. Also, Ruakh is a Hebrew word which means Spirit, wind, or breath, more on that later.


Name
	Chapters
	Distinctive Notes
	Melody Cycle 1 Creation   
	Genesis
1:1 - 2:3
plus 2:4-15
	After the seven-word Hebrew title of Genesis 1:1, we read about the precreation state of watery chaos, a standard image for nothing at that point in history. However, with the presence of Elohim about to act, hovering as Ruakh over the face of the waters, we have hope. Elohim speaks to create light and divides those chaos waters to bring order to the sea, sky, and land in Days 1-3. He then fills those spaces with inhabitants in Days 4-6, starting with the lights in the sky, which are called signs. He makes living beings to fill those spaces, giving them a blessing to be fruitful and multiply. Ultimately, God creates the human in His image, male and female He created them, which He sees as “very good.” Finally, on the 7th day, God rests, i.e., takes up residence and rules without conflict. In the imagination of the Ancient Near East, when a ruler rests, it is a time of shalom, peace within the land. We know this story well, thinking of it as a one-time creation event, but we need to keep reading to realize that creation is a cycle. It will repeat!3
Still in the Creation section, Genesis 2:4-6 offers another perspective of non-life, a barren desert without water. God brings about life first via a stream, then the human, and finally trees, all in fun Hebrew wordplay. Again, God’s life is present, gently breathing the breath of life into the human.
	Melody Cycle 1 Choice   
	Genesis 2:16 - 3:24
	The Choice portion of the melody starts with the divine command not to eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and bad. However, between the divine command and the Fall, the authors insert an example of Yahweh seeing, taking, building, and giving in 2:18-22. Unlike Yahweh, the humans see what is good in their eyes, then take, eat, and give non-life. The inevitable consequences follow. God acknowledges the unfortunate new state of His creation but makes some promises worth noting on the way out, see Genesis 3:15.
	Melody Cycle 1 Division   
	Genesis
4:1 - 6:12
	Outside of Eden, the next generation escalates the spiral of Division. As predicted in Genesis 3:16, they conceive for themselves instead of receiving from God, then experience great anguish. Cain kills Abel. Lamech takes two wives and murders a boy for striking him. The Sons of Elohim see and take the beautiful, tov, daughters of humanity in a parallel spiritual rebellion. We end up with the Nephilim, and the whole land is ruined by Genesis 6:12. If Genesis 1 had been a singular creation event then the whole cosmos would have been a very short, rather pointless, project. Fortunately for us, creation, life, and blessing are repeated notes in God's song.
	Melody Cycle 1 Collapse   
	Genesis
6:13 - 7:24
	The Collapse here is one we all know well. God brings about a great leveling act to cleanse the land via the Flood.6 This is a clear return to the Genesis 1:2 precreation state. By the end of Genesis 7, the world is again in the same watery chaos image of nothing, minus one small difference… a boat, covered with atonement, preserving seed. This symbol of God preserving life is of no small significance for you and me. Noah, seven other people, and a whole bunch of animals sit and wait until Yahweh does it again. “How long? Oh LORD?” the poets say. How long until You do it again?
	Genesis 1-7: Pattern Breakers!
In the same way that Genesis 1-7 is The Template for the melody, it is also the template for pattern breakers! Clearly, Enoch and Noah don’t follow the characteristic division and collapse cycle, but there is also a delightful ski jump at the end of chapter 4. From 4:1 to 4:24 we see characteristic human choices to establish the pattern. In those verses, Eve claims to have made a man all by herself in comparison to Yahweh. The authors use clever wordplay by noting only that Cain was conceived, the Hebrew root harah (הרה), with no mention of him being a son, the Hebrew word ben (בן). Cain, however, is invited by God to be a pattern breaker in the next generation. He can rule over sin, but instead he chooses the path of non-life. Then Cain’s wife will also conceive, but again no mention of their child, a different Enoch, being a son. We have already seen where that path spirals out of control in the Division section above. Let’s skip to verse 25, where we will see something new that you won’t find on the Division spiral.


In the closing section of chapter 4, verses 25 and 26, we start with intentionally repeated words from verse 1, “Adam knew his wife again,” but things go differently this time! First, right at this pivot, the Hebrew name for Adam changes from The Adam, i.e. “The Human”, to just Adam, a personal name. Conversely, Eve’s name was used in verse 1, but now she called only “Adam’s wife” to emphasize their union over individuality. Next, the authors hint that something is new by only stating that she bears a son (yalad ben) with no mention of her conceiving. 


1 Now, the human knew his wife Eve,
and she conceived and she gave birth 


25 and Adam knew his wife again
and she gave birth to a son,


Obviously, she did conceive for every birth. She clearly became pregnant at some point, but the authors do not mention it, since this birth is not all about Eve. Finally, Adam’s wife shows her new perspective by giving the glory to Elohim, not herself. She sees life as a gift to be received instead of an act accomplished by herself. Then it hits you... She is the first to break the pattern! She was the first to take the fruit, but she was also the first to turn back and make a different choice. We all fail, that’s really nothing new, but we don’t all turn back to God. Eve, Mother of all living-ones, is famous for Genesis 3:6-7, but she was also the first to receive the fruit. Welcome home! I say “Welcome home” because Eden is a place where heaven and earth overlap. A place where human and divine work together as one (yachad in Hebrew). It has always been more than just a physical spot on the map. Let's bring life to the next generation together!


Here are the pattern breaker choices in the first cycle of the melody, starting with Eve.


Chapters
	Distinctive Notes
	Genesis 4:25-26
	4:25 and Adam (the personal name, not the characteristic Human) knew his wife again
and she gave birth to a son (yalad ben),
and she named him "Seth  (שת)," because,
    “God has appointed (שת) me another seed in place of Abel, for Cain killed him.”
26 and to Seth, to him also a son was born (yalad ben);
and he called his name Enosh.
then it was begun, to call on the name of Yahweh.


Eve and Seth are living out only the second half of Genesis 3:16, the necessary labor pains, instead of the greatly multiplied grief of conception that we saw in 4:1-24.


3:16 and to the woman he said,
 [Part 1] "I will greatly multiply your grief and your conception (הרה harah),
 [Part 2]  in grief you will birth children (yalad benim, sons),


If these phrases were used only in this verse, the mystery would be impossible to unravel, but that's not how the Bible works. The authors slowly revealed additional information as stories repeat to invite hearers to become active participants in receiving truth. For example, these subtle word choices will echo not just in chapter 4 with Eve herself, but throughout Scripture. To conceive is not a 100% match for pending great anguish, but it’s a hint used more than a few times. Consider: Avram and Hagar conceive, Genesis 16:4, but Avraham and Sarah conceive and bear a son, 21:2. David and Bathsheba conceive, 2 Samuel 11:5, but later bear a son, 12:24. The later stories inform the earlier Genesis 3:16 mystery. These authors have crafted for you an experience to come to know the Lord. It is a carefully curated, deliberate choice in the design of this text which slowly explains itself if you work to receive it. Think of it like a quest that reveals truth. With these patterns in mind, we return to Genesis 4:25-26, where Seth and Enosh are on God’s chosen path. They are sons (think John 1:12) who experience only necessary labor pains. Let's see how God will work through these pattern breaker choices in the generations that follow.
	Genesis 5:22-24
	5:22 and Enoch walked with God three hundred years …


23 and all the days of Enoch were three hundred and sixty-five years,
24 and Enoch walked with God; and he was not, for God took him.
	Genesis 6:1-7:5
	6:13 And Elohim said to Noah, …(build an ark, a mini cosmos)...
22 And Noah did
     according to all that Elohim had commanded him, so he did.


7:1 And Yahweh said to Noah, …(fill that space with inhabitants)...
5 And Noah did
     according to all that Yahweh had commanded him.


And Noah did it! That’s all we needed to know.
	

God preserves a remnant to partner with him in the next melody cycle, and the pattern breakers are that remnant. The prophets will later develop this concept at length, but the theme is planted right here in Genesis. They will join God to rebuild the cosmos when he does it again!
Genesis 8-11: The Second Round of the Melody
Before we jump into the second cycle of the melody, I’d like to pause for a moment and congratulate you for making it to the center of the center of this guide. We find ourselves in Genesis 8:1 and it feels symbolic, as if very early in the morning on the first day of a new week. I sure hope something important happens. Sure enough, something truly remarkable and significant will happen. Genesis 1 will replay in Genesis 8:1-9:18, but in new ways for a new generation. A pattern is not a pattern unless it repeats. So in Genesis 1-11, the introduction to the Bible, we see the cycle of life, not once, but twice. The Hebrew Bible authors are quietly going to reshape the way you see the world. The Spirit has breathed into them a truth that God never stops bringing creation, life, and blessing. Let’s reflect on their words and try to become listeners that live out Psalm 1:1-1:3.


The cycle begins again in Genesis 8:1, unmistakably, right in the chiastic center of the flood narrative.8 Life begins with the presence of God, shown again as Ruakh (רוח), the Hebrew word that means wind, breath, or Spirit. Additionally, we introduce a new highly significant word, zakar, which means not just “remembered,” but more accurately “remembered and acted on it!”7


8:1 “And Elohim remembered (zakar) Noah 
      and all the living creatures 
      and all the beasts that were with him in the ark; 
and Elohim caused to pass 
      a Spirit/wind (Ruakh) to cover the land 
            and the waters subsided.”


To help you compare t[b]he two “about to act” creation moments, here is the precreation state of Genesis 1:2, where the Ruakh was over the face of the waters. 


1:2 Now, the land was wild and waste  (תהו ווהו • tohu va-vohu),
      and darkness was over the face of the deep abyss  (תהום • tehom),
      but the breath (Ruakh) of Elohim was hovering over the face of the waters  (המים)  


This guide is not a deep dive on the Holy Spirit, the third person of the Trinity, for that consider a work like Tyler Staton’s The Familiar Stranger.10 However, I do want to at least point out that the Spirit did not come only after Jesus' death at Pentecost in Acts 2. The same Spirit has been present and active since page one, doing what God does best, breathing life into His creation.


By the way, props to the 16th-century Bible scholars who chose to put the first melody into exactly seven chapters. Well done! 


Next, Elohim commands Noah and his family to go out from the ark, blessing them Genesis 1 style:
 
9:1 And Elohim blessed Noah and his sons and he said to them,
     “Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the land.


All is good in blissful Creation at the top of the mountain with God. However, it makes an informed reader wonder what will come next… and worry. The authors continue the Creation, Choice, Division of Relationships, and Collapse cycle using very clear notes.


In the second pass through the melody, Genesis 8-11, notice that the authors never replay a story identically. Each cycle fills out the one before, quietly expanding your sense of what each note is communicating. By the end of only two laps, you’ll reflect back on Genesis 1-7 in ways that you couldn’t see before.


Name
	Chapters
	Distinctive Notes
	Melody Cycle 2 Creation   
	Genesis 8:1-9:18 
	We again hear Creation notes of blessing, but with a new twist, the humans and animals are partnering with God in the creation process. Events continue in blissful harmony with a sacrifice, covenant, and a sign of the covenant, the rainbow. What could go wrong? However, we know the cycle will repeat since Genesis 8:21 warns us that the human heart has not changed.
	Melody Cycle 2 Choice   
	Genesis 9:19-29
	The next generation repeats the sins of the old as the Choice notes begin to play in the new Eden space. Noah takes the wine in an illicit way by getting drunk. Then he uncovers himself in the middle of his tent. These are verbal echoes of Adam and Eve taking the fruit in the middle of the garden, then realizing they were naked. Finally, Ham “saw the nakedness of his father”. In Hebrew, a man's nakedness is his wife, Leviticus 18:7-8 spells this out plainly. The act is so terrible that the authors use a common Hebrew euphemism. Despite our modern debates and mystery, “seeing the nakedness” is a standard phrase stating that Ham had sex with his father’s wife. The word choice ties this unthinkable moment into the “seeing what is good in his eyes” theme. Translators face an impossible task here. They need to maintain the 3:6 “seeing” hyperlink, discern the idioms, and keep it to five words or fewer. So they usually just follow the pattern of prior translations, throw their hands in the air, and give a literal word-for-word translation, leaving interpretation to the reader (which is fine, let commentaries explain it). Next, much like God did in the Garden exit, this new state results in Noah giving blessings to Yahweh the Elohim of Shem and curses to Canaan. Wait, Canaan? Where did Ham go? Canaan, the father of the Canaanites, was Ham’s fourth and final son, but the authors don’t explain the generational jump at all. Instead, you are forced to use your imagination to fill in the gap.
	Melody Cycle 2 Division   
	Genesis 9:22-11:5
	It is no surprise that Division comes next. In fact, it has already begun. Ham’s horrific power play fractured the family, causing the three brothers to divide into the nations. The spiral continues with Nimrod building Babylon, the icon for communal evil choices used throughout the Bible. Finally, Yahweh does a thorough investigation of the situation in Genesis 11:5, “And Yahweh came down to see the city and the tower that the sons of humanity built.” Dangerous notes are beginning to play.
	Melody Cycle 2 Collapse   
	Genesis 11:7-9
	In this cycle, the collapse is Yahweh scattering the civilization of Babylon at the Tower of Babel. 11:9 “from there Yahweh scattered them upon the face of all the land.” In our generation, scattering a nation doesn't carry the same weight, but in this context, these are Collapse notes. For example, in 9:19, the authors describe the “scattering” using the Hebrew word naphats, which Psalm 2:9 uses to “shatter” like a pot. So God shattered the people of Babylon like a pot onto the face of the land. God has initiated the collapse in both cycles so far to set the stage for new life,9 but that will not always be the case as the melody continues. 
	

With only two passes through the melody, we can already hear many distinctive notes that emerge from Genesis 1-11. Here are only a few:
  

Enjoyable side quest: Go read the first two chapters of Luke, listening for Creation notes of Spirit, blessing, and signs. There are more than you might guess, and you’ll wonder how you missed them before.
Genesis 8-11: Pattern Breakers!
Who are the pattern breakers in the second round of the melody and how will God preserve life through them? It is a shorter melody, so there are fewer pattern breakers, but we still see a few.  We have Noah who builds an altar and makes a going-up offering to Yahweh. Yahweh smells the soothing smell and responds in blessing. This sacrifice note is mirrored in other rounds of the melody in creative ways. The next pattern breakers are Shem and Japheth. They do the opposite of Ham and cover their father’s nakedness. This time, not seeing their father's nakedness is simple and literal. These authors use clever wordplay even when the subject matter makes us feel uncomfortable. Subtle symmetries, through repeated words, help readers see the inversion.


Afterwards, Noah blesses Yahweh the Elohim of Shem and again a remnant is preserved through Shem’s line. Genesis 11:10-26 gives another ten-generation bridge, mirroring chapter 5. It is the tenth, Avram, who will partner with God to start the next melody cycle. Will Avram be the one who will crush the head of the snake?
Genesis 11:27-22:19: Cycles Three to Seven with Avraham
With Genesis 1-11 complete, we come to the next major section of Genesis and start the third cycle of the melody. It opens with a title in Genesis 11:27, “Now these are the generations of Terakh.” Then, following the Genesis 1 pattern, we have a new precreation state in 11:28-32. This time, the symbols for non-life are not watery chaos or a dry desert. Instead, if you read with eyes looking for symbols of death and disorder, you will notice:
* And Haran died before his father Terakh
* And Sarai was barren, she had no child
* And they went out … to go to the land of Canaan; and they went as far as Haran
* And Terakh died in Haran
Without God’s presence, the “wild and waste” from Genesis 1:2 is depicted with these new symbols of precreation non-life. Genesis 12:1 then starts the Creation section of Melody with Yahweh speaking to Avram, who steps into the role of Adam and Noah. In this generation, he will partner with God to once again bring about creation, life, and blessing. 


12:1 “And Yahweh said to Avram, 
        Get yourself going…”


It’s a wonderful and significant speech, but a bit long for this guide. Go read it! It calls Avram to come out, much like Noah was called out of the Ark. Then Yahweh expands the new Creation promise, stating: “in you all the families of the land will find blessing”. Verses 4 and 5 then tell another journey story, but now with God present. Interestingly, this second journey was perhaps the same trip, see Acts 7:2. This reminds me of Genesis 1:2 where darkness was over the face of the tehom, the waters of death, but the Spirit of Elohim was hovering over the face of the waters. Those might be the same physical states, just described first without God's presence and then with it. The difference is not what you would see with your eyes. The difference is God.


Next, Avram journeys throughout the land with Yahweh in Genesis 12:6-9, much like Adam and Eve walked with God in the windy part of the day. An informed reader enjoys the bliss of Creation notes, but is again worried about what will happen next. Yahweh makes a clear, unconditioned declaration in Genesis 12:7: “To your seed I will give this land.” Will Avram trust and obey, staying in the land that Yahweh has promised? You already know. You have been shaped by the melody without even realizing it. The cycle will continue as long as the human heart is unchanged, but God will continue to preserve life through it all. The One who IS does not change.


We could continue discussing the melody with the Choice in Egypt of seeing, taking, and giving, then a Division of Relationships with the “brothers,” Avram and his nephew Lot, followed by a Collapse of four kings sweeping away five. Instead of continuing through the cycle in a linear way from this point, which is already getting pretty lengthy, let’s mention only the Collapse moments that mark the seven cycles of Genesis 1-22. Working through each full cycle with your own group is worth your time. The story takes a much closer look at one person and we see the complexity of humans as we are pattern breakers one moment, then go right back to being characteristic ten seconds later. The creative twists will be surprising and rewarding as you meditate on the melody. The seven Collapse stories of Genesis 1-22 are:


Name
	Chapters
	Distinctive Notes
	Melody Cycle 1 Collapse
  

	Genesis
7:17-24 
	The Flood: 7:23 And he wiped away every standing-thing that was upon the face of the land, from humanity to animals to creepers and to birds of the skies, and they were wiped away from the land; and only Noah was left remaining, and those with him in the ark.
	Melody Cycle 2 Collapse  
	Genesis 11:8-9
	The Scattering: 11:8-9 And Yahweh scattered them from there upon the face of all the land, and they stopped building the city. Therefore, its name was called Babylon (Babel), because there Yahweh made-babble of the language of all the land, and from there Yahweh scattered them upon the face of all the land.
	Melody Cycle 3 Collapse  
	Genesis 14:1-12 
	Sodom #1: Four kings from Mesopotamia waged war against five kings, which included the people, possessions, and food of Sodom and Gomorrah. Avram’s nephew Lot is taken in the process. This is our first collapse of human origin, but the flood language remains the same as they sweep away. Meanwhile, Avram is symbolically in the ark, but then goes out with 318 men and “God’s help” to restore life.
	Melody Cycle 4 Collapse  
	Genesis
16:6
	Hagar #1: A rape victim, pregnant, fleeing in the wilderness with nowhere to go and no human that loves her in the world. Only Yahweh sees this Egyptian slave-girl.7 In this fourth cycle of the melody the Choice, Division of Relationships, and Collapse happen in only six verses in 16:1-6. It’s an explosion where these authors can replay the whole story with very few words once you know the notes to listen for. A single choice by Sarai and Avram to take their Egyptian slave-girl Hagar causes a violent division of every relationship leading to a very sudden collapse. God, however, enters our mess, sees Hagar in the wilderness, and restores life in ways that feel interestingly compromised, making the best of a broken situation. Read this in-depth Hagar article for more insights.
	Melody Cycle 5 Collapse  
	Genesis
19:15-29 
	Sodom #2: 19:24 and Yahweh caused it to rain over Sodom and over Gomorrah, sulphur and fire from Yahweh from the skies. The notes of this culminating collapse can’t be missed as it uses a flood of words to connect the melodies. Noteworthy in this story is that Lot and his family are saved due to Yahweh’s mercy, 19:16, and the phrase “Yahweh remembered (zakar) Avraham"8 is used in 19:29, when Avraham wasn’t even there. These authors don’t use words for no reason.
	Melody Cycle 6 Collapse  
	Genesis 21:14-16
	Hagar #2: Hagar is this time sent into the wilderness with Ishmael, her, most likely, 17 year old boy lad, the Hebrew word na’ar. She is a slave-girl no longer and has her son with her, but the water runs dry and death seems inevitable. Does this remind you of Genesis 2:5, a lifeless desert with no water? But Elohim listens to the voice of the na’ar (a fun wordplay on the meaning of Ishmael’s name), converting Collapse into Creation once more. The turning point is a messenger of Elohim calling to Hagar from the skies. Hagar is told not to be afraid, but to ‘get up’ and take the lad with her hand. Elohim will make him into a great nation. Sound familiar? The same promise was given to Avram. Elohim opened her eyes and she saw a well of water at Beer Sheva, the Well of Seven. She fills the water skin and she gives life to the lad as well. Not a single word is unimportant as Hagar, the non-choosen, becomes an unexpected partner in creation, life, and blessing.
	Melody Cycle 7 Collapse  
	Genesis 22:1-10
	The Binding of Isaac: The seventh collapse is told one syllable at a time as Avraham sends out his hand and takes the eater, the knife, to slay his son. This collapse is brought about by God’s command, which includes the words “Get yourself going…” precisely mirroring the initial calling of Avram. Hyperlinking all the way back to the start of his journey hints that everything in between has been leading up to this moment. Avraham's struggle to trust God is put to the ultimate test and God’s song is again at the precipice of non-life as the promised seed is bound on the altar. When we open the pages to this collapse, we find quite a bit more than just a flood. The seventh collapse necessitates a more in-depth discussion to make sure we all see a bit more of what the authors are communicating.
	The Melody Points to Jesus
Without really planning it, we’ll carefully study the seventh melody and something will happen where the story naturally turns to Jesus. Let’s ride the wave together.
The Seventh Collapse: Avraham’s Test
As you might have suspected, the seventh collapse of the melody and the creation moment after are rather significant. Without even knowing the rest of the story, a careful reader of the Hebrew Bible would know that when this melody repeats, it will reveal God in a major way. Indeed, the concept of The Melody and The Test are two different topics, but they are so interwoven here that we have no choice but to jump into Genesis 22:1-19 with both feet! Take a moment to read those 19 verses again, then we’ll discuss.


In the text below the name Isaac is written as Yitskhaq to help us more faithfully pronounce the original Hebrew name. 


22:1 And it came about after these things,
that Elohim tested Avraham,
and he said to him,
    “Avraham.”
And he said,
    “Look, it’s me!”
2 And he said,
    “Please take your son,
        your only one,
        whom you love,
        Yitskhaq,
and get yourself going to the land of Moriah [“Seeing” = (מריה)],
and make him go up there as a going-up offering,
on one of the mountains which I will say to you.”
3 And Avraham rose early in the morning,
and he bound up his donkey,
and he took
    two of his young men with him
    and Yitskhaq his son,
and he split the wood of the going-up offering,
and he arose and he went to the place which Elohim said to him.
4 On the third day,
then Avraham lifted his eyes,
and he saw  (ראה) the place from a distance.
5 And Avraham said to his young men,
    “Sit yourselves here with the donkey,
    and I and the young boy,
    we will go to there,
    and we will worship,
    and we will return to you.”
6 And Avraham took the wood of the going-up offering,
and he placed upon Yitskhaq his son,
and he took in his hand the fire and the eater [= knife],
and the two of them went, together as one.
7 And Yitskhaq said to Avraham his father,
and he said,
    “My father.”
And he said,
    “Look, it’s me, my son.”
And he said,
    “Look, the fire and the wood,
    but where is the sheep for the going-up offering?”
8 And Avraham said,
    “Elohim will see to it  (יראה), the sheep for the going-up offering, my son.”
And the two of them went, together as one.
9 And they went to the place which Elohim said to him,
and Avraham built there an altar,
and he arranged the wood,
and he bound up Yitskhaq his son,
and he placed him upon the altar atop the wood,
10 and Avraham sent out his hand,
and he took the eater [= knife] to slay his son,


[Collapse]
________________


[Creation]


11 and the messenger of Yahweh called to him from the skies,
and he said,
    “Avraham! Avraham!”
and he said,
    “Look, it’s me!
12 And he said,
    “Don’t send out your hand toward the young one!
    And don’t do anything to him,
    because now I know that you are one who fears Elohim,
    and you didn’t withhold your son, your only one, from me.”
13 And Avraham lifted his eyes,
and he saw  (ראה), and look, a ram afar, caught in a bramble by its horns,
and Avraham went and he took the ram,
and he made it go up as a going-up offering in the place of his son,
14 and Avraham called the name of that place,
    “Yahweh will see to it  (יראה).“
Which is why, today, it is said,
    “On the mountain of Yahweh, it will be seen to  (יראה).”
15 And the messenger of Yahweh called to Avraham a second time from the skies,
16 and he said,
    “I swear an oath  (שבע) by myself, utterance of Yahweh,
    on account of the fact that you did this thing,
    and you did not withhold your son, your only one,
    17 that I will certainly bless you,
        and I will certainly multiply your seed,
            like the stars of the skies,
            and like the sand upon the edge of the sea,
        and your seed will inherit the gate of their enemies,
    18 and all the nations of the land will find blessing in your seed,
on the heel of the fact that you listened to my voice.”
19 And Avraham returned to his young men,
and they arose and they went together as one to Beer-Sheva (=Well of Seven  (שבע))
and Avraham dwelt in Beer-Sheva.




The collapse opens with a clear title in 22:1 stating that Avraham is tested. When you think “test,” try to imagine an experience that reveals the truth, not a stressful exam with right and wrong answers. It reveals what is already present through action. For example, Noah was called righteous in 6:9 by the narrator, but he still had to actually build the Ark in 6:22 and Yahweh sees the truth in 7:1. Likewise, Avraham was called righteous in 15:6, but he would still have to go through his test in Genesis 22. God is giving him a quest to reveal truth, not tempting him to do evil. There is a difference. God is asking him to trust in His wisdom beyond anything he can see with his eyes. It is clearly not a test God would give you or me, but the test fits the man if you reflect on Avraham’s whole story. Jesus illustrated that tests are specific to the person when he spoke to the rich young ruler. That man’s test was based on the thing that separated him from God, his wealth.  He needed to trust God and give away all he had to the poor, then follow Jesus. In his case, it only revealed his inability to take a radical step of trust, and he went away downcast. When God chose “Father Abraham” to initiate His restoration plan, he knew exactly what test would reveal him and he knew that Avraham would trust his voice. In the same way, The Father knew what test would reveal The Son and he trusted the Son to complete it. That test reveals God to us.9 Consider Psalm 22:31 and John 3:16.


The hyperlinks from Genesis 22 to Jesus are impossible to miss. It is a test for both the father and the son. However, they traveled together perfectly aligned, both before and after all the details are known. The phrase “and the two of them went, together-as-one” (yachad in Hebrew) is repeated three times. Isaac put the wood on his back and walked with his father at the same physical place where Jesus will later be lifted up on the cross. Keep in mind that all of this was written hundreds of years before Jesus ever walked the earth. That’s worth a long walk and a cup of tea. Finally, Avraham’s collapse and Jesus' collapse end the same way, the son is returned to life. Avraham is revealed. Elohim sees. And a going-up offering of a ram substitutes for Avraham’s offspring. As always, God makes sure that creation, life, and blessing have the final say over a collapse.


Before we leave this story, let’s consider what it might have meant to Jesus. What thoughts raced through Jesus’ head as he mentally recounted this story in the Garden of Gethsemane? And when did He fully grasp the details? John the Baptist publicly named Jesus as the “Lamb of God” in John 1:29. I think Jesus knew fully what that meant. God’s character was known in Exodus 34:6-7, but Jesus would still have to go through the test. This plan, made before time began, is how God would reveal who He is to us. God loves you. He has said it in His Word, and He has shown it in His actions. He has passed the test to show that nothing will separate Him from joining us even when he knows it’s coming.


Then the outpouring of blessings given by God’s oath “on the heel” of the test is worth reading a few times. Genesis 22:16-18, Yahweh’s Oath (שבע sheva) at the conclusion of Melody seven (שבע sheva):


22:16 “I swear an oath  (שבע sheva) by myself, utterance of Yahweh,
on account of the fact that you did this thing,
and you did not withhold your son, your only one,
17 that I will certainly bless you,
      and I will certainly multiply your seed,
            like the stars of the skies,
            and like the sand upon the edge of the sea,
      and your seed will inherit the gate of their enemies,
18 and all the nations of the land will find blessing in your seed,
on the heel of the fact that you listened to my voice.”


Let’s read it again, “all nations will find blessing in your seed.” The author wants you to remember Genesis 3:15 by mentioning the words “heel” and the future “seed” so close together. Two words are more than enough to see this connection.


3:15 And I will set hostility
between you and the woman,
and between your seed and her seed,
he will strike your head
and you will strike his heel."


However, the people would have to wait a long time until God repeats these specific notes. The Genesis Melody won't fail, but it does require waiting patiently for God’s perfect timing.
Seeing the Melody in the New Testament
We’ll briefly pause our review of Genesis and consider The Genesis Melody as it plays out in the Gospel According to Luke. You probably know that cycle of the melody well.3 In Luke, the story opens with God’s Spirit creating life in two impossible places of non-life: a barren womb long past childbearing and one that had never known a man. Luke starts, not just with the birth of Jesus to the virgin Mary, but with the interwoven story of John the Baptist’s birth to Zechariah and Elizabeth. The author of this story saw that even the names of the parents were significant:
* Zechariah, from the Hebrew Zakar-Yah זכריה, means “Yahweh Remembered, zakar.”8 It's that zakar word again, the one that means “acts on his promise.” Compare that with Genesis 8:1, “Elohim remembered, zakar, Noah”8 or 19:29, “Yahweh remembered, zakar, Avraham.”
* Elizabeth, from the Hebrew Eli-Sheva אלישבע, means “My Elohim’s Oath”. It’s that sheva, oath, word again! Compare that with 22:16, “I swear an oath (שבע sheva).”


Zechariah and Elizabeth are set up as clear mirrors of Avraham and Sarah, childless at a good old age. And if you put their names together, you literally have “Yahweh Remembered His Oath from Genesis 22!” OK, I admit, I added that last bit. The authors who handed over source material to the gentile Luke, see Luke 1:1, saw this melody! They worked with Luke to share the Good News about Jesus to all the nations via the same Creation notes that echo Genesis, now appearing in Luke, chapters 1 and 2. Luke’s story then has a Choice in the wilderness for forty days and a matching Test in Gethsemane before the end. There is a journey with Jesus, just like Avram's journey with Yahweh, and a Division with the leaders of Israel (that’s putting it lightly). Then a reply of the seventh cycle Collapse at the cross.6 Finally, this is the most important part, what comes after a Collapse? The author of life allows His own body, His Son, to experience Collapse, from which God will… You know exactly what happened next, on the third day no less, see Genesis 22:4. The Genesis Melody has been written in Scripture for a thousand years. Jesus surely said many similar things on the road to Emmaus in Luke 24, as he “opened the Scriptures” to his disciples.3 


As for me, when this really sank in, it made me want to be a pattern breaker and join God’s story. I've carefully read, reflected on, and discussed His Word. I now see myself within this grand message of hope and love. I've been promised that it is possible to help bring life. I choose to live in right-relationship with Yahweh. I am part of Avraham’s seed and want to do my part in bringing blessing to the nations. Now,... how do I do it? How can I receive the Spirit, partner with God, and bring about creation, life, and blessing in my generation? It sounds complex, but the first step is actually easy,... trust Jesus, listen to His voice.


No word from the Lord is unimportant, so it's wise to study the New Testament even more diligently than the Old. When studying His word you’ll find advice/commands for life and see the path Jesus laid out for his followers for then and now. For example, Jesus prayed aloud His plan for us during the Last Supper, recorded in John 17:20-26. Life is an intentional choice to be united through love with God and His images. Jesus knew that we needed encouragement to avoid the Division of Relationships. He had seen the Bible's message play out in his generation, just like us. Perfect unity through abiding (meno) love between all the images of God, the Father, and the Son. Everything else in the Bible is an implementation detail of that simple, primary premise. We have to choose unity in Jesus to avoid the characteristic human cycle. That plan also reminds me of something we like to say at BibleProject:
  

However, when I look at my life, how I use my time, where I invest my given resources,… 
    Do I make the Choice that leads to life with every little choice I make? 
        Do I contribute to Division and fear Collapse? 
            Do I have eyes to see and ears to hear God’s melody?
                What is God clearly going to do next?


He does not prevent the Collapse, even though that seems good in our eyes, but instead He goes through it with us and there will be a genesis coming soon after. Will we choose to trust God in even this?


Let the Bible reshape your understanding of the world, so that you can know|love Him more. Make a Choice to become an image of God who receives to see good, then builds and gives in every part of the melody.
Beyond Genesis 22: After the Sheva Cycle 
The melody in Genesis, of course, doesn’t end in chapter 22. If you read Matthew 24:1-14, it’s clear Jesus knew the inevitable path of typical human choices across every generation, and he prepared his disciples for what was coming. The cycle would not end even with Jesus’ resurrection. Something did change that day, but the difference is not what you would see with your eyes. Hearts aren’t changed in our world today either, so every generation, including ours, faces the same challenges. Yahweh, the one who IS, has always known the answer, and He has made it known to us through His Son, completing a test, revealing the truth. God really loves you.


After the mountaintop, you should also read chapter 23. It is a wonderfully symbolic story about paying the full price for the land. You can meditate with me about why that is important. How does that square with Yahweh promising to just give the land in Genesis 12:7 and 17:8? Shouldn't we just receive the free Eden gift? Interestingly, Avraham, like David later, declines the offer and is steadfast to pay the full price. They both refuse to make an offering/sacrifice that costs them nothing. Do I get it? Not yet. However, I feel like we should consider this story as significant after the 1-22 melody cycles.


And the story keeps going after Genesis 23. The eighth melody cycle ends with Avraham's death and the scattering of his various sons. He takes a third wife and has six more sons in chapter 25 (oh my). The biblical authors aren’t selling “happily ever after” stories; they are communicating the choices we humans make and how God works through it all (consider Jacob!). After Avraham is old and complete (sheva), he is “gathered to his people” in 25:8. The melody, however, continues generation after generation with Rivqah (Rebecca) and Yitskhaq (Isaac), then Jacob and Esau, Judah and Joseph, and on into our lives.
Extra Sheva Observations
To bring this discussion full circle, let’s return to Genesis once more to see evidence that these authors, with the help of the Spirit, already realized the significance of this forward pointing message in Genesis 21-22.


Throughout Scripture the authors regularly highlight the most important concept of a literary unit by using key repeated words, known as lead words. In this seventh cycle of the melody, which goes from the voice in the sky bringing life to Hagar and Ishmael, through the binding of Isaac, the primary lead word is clearly sheva. The same Hebrew letters of sheva, שבע, form multiple Hebrew words. Think of it like the English letters lead, which has multiple meanings: lead the way, pencil lead, or leader. The Hebrew word sheva, שבע, means seven, oath, and, later, completion, making it a very significant word. Perhaps you've noticed the number 7 gets used a lot.


The sheva theme is everywhere in this melody cycle. The Creation notes opens with Hagar and Ishmael at Beer-Sheva, the Well of Seven. The middle section with Avimelek takes place at Beer-Sheva, centered on an oath, a sheva. Then, after the mountain in Moriah, the literary unit ends with Avraham dwelling in Beer-Sheva. The start, middle, and end are all at Beer-Sheva. Everything points to Yahweh's culminating sheva, His oath. In addition to the location, there are more sheva words used in Genesis 21-22 than you might guess. The numbers tell the story:
  

And if you focus on only the use of sheva words in cycles 3-7 with Avraham it’s almost funny.
  

By modern writing standards, the repeated use of sheva borders on excessive, but that’s exactly the point. Listeners would hear the word as prominent. Here is one example from Genesis 21:28-32, a “seemingly” insignificant passage.


  



The authors use extra sheva, שבע, words surrounding being a witness. That’ll preach!


I’ll let you be the judge, did these authors realize this was also the seventh cycle of the melody if you’ve been counting from the beginning? It is the highly structured Word of God given to us by humans working with the Spirit after all.1


Your Next Steps
To learn more about the melody, if you can find a group of people that like to read the Bible, don’t passively read anything else from us. Go do it!4 Read directly from God what the Spirit has breathed.11 Grab a friend, sit down with your family, or work with a small group to read Genesis 1-23 again, listening for the melody woven throughout these narratives. Use any translation you like. For my group, we use the BibleProject Classroom translations. They are colorful, hyperliteral translations that help us see the structure behind the Wisdom of God. In the past, we have used a website I made, https://thegenesismelody.web.app/avraham.html, which links to those Classroom translations. Today, however, they are available in a new beautiful format right within the BibleProject app.  We hope you and your group can DELIGHT in using it (inside joke, just go with it).


If you do find yourself in a situation where you don’t have people around you today that you can read the Bible with, then spend time watching and learning from the Genesis Classroom courses. Start at the beginning with Heaven and Earth and make sure you get all the way to Jacob, then re-read this guide. They will change the way you read the rest of the story! Just visit https://bibleproject.com/classroom/ on the website or use our mobile app.


Have fun falling in love with these amazing, and sometimes challenging, texts. When you approach the rest of the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament, what you get out of it depends a lot on the reading skills you have developed. Becoming a better community of receivers takes work, but it’s worth it. We all learn differently, but establish a foundation with the Bible’s introduction and it will help so many stories lock into place. For example, when you read in John 20:22 that Jesus “breathed on them,” you’ll see even more. Why did he breathe on them? That’s weird right? Nope. Jesus knows The Genesis Melody. He is symbolically replaying Creation and empowering them to live it out. His Ruakh will be with the remnant as they partner with Him to bring about creation, life, and blessing to the next generation.


By spending time meditating on the Bible’s introduction, we’ve already begun to know|love Him more. Of course, real change comes when you personally partner with God and live it out by loving your neighbor, the image of God sitting right next to you. This is a test we all know is coming. What will it reveal in you that is already present?


Closing Thoughts
A Short Farewell Prayer
As the thief said on the cross: 
Jesus, remember8 us when You come into Your kingdom. 


We choose to follow you. Let’s do it again!






Bibliography
1. Drimalla, Shara, and BibleProject Team. "Did God or People Write the Bible?" BibleProject, Feb 14, 2022. (Paradigm #1)
2. Drimalla, Shara, and BibleProject Team. "What Makes the Bible Unified?" BibleProject, Feb 28, 2022. (Paradigm #2)
3. Drimalla, Shara, and BibleProject Team. "How Does the Bible's Story Lead to Jesus?" BibleProject, March 28, 2022. (Paradigm #3)
4. Drimalla, Shara, and BibleProject Team. "What Happens When We Read the Bible Together?" BibleProject, May 2, 2022. (Paradigm #4)
5. Hayes, Cheree, and BibleProject Team. "What Kind of Culture Shaped the Bible?" BibleProject, June 27, 2022. (Paradigm #5)
6. Patton, Andy. "Why Did God Flood the World?" BibleProject, Nov 12, 2019.
7. BibleProject Scholarship Team. "What Hagar and Ishmael's Story Reveals About God's Purposes" BibleProject, Feb 6, 2026.
8. Hayes, Cheree, and BibleProject Team. "If God Remembers, Does He Also Forget?" BibleProject, April 25, 2022.
9. Athanasius of Alexandria. "On the Incarnation" St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 1944. (Translated by A Religious of C.S.M.V.; Contains the "Divine Dilemma" in Chapter 3)
10. Staton, Tyler. "The Familiar Stranger: Finding Companionship with God in a World of Loneliness" Zondervan, 2024.
11. Lewis, C.S. "On the Reading of Old Books" St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 1944. (Introduction to On the Incarnation; Written to encourage first-hand knowledge)


[a]I really like this forward: original and so personal, warm, and inviting!
[b]Super helpful to put these side by side here!